# the basics revisted

## environment variables
any variable set in the environment when make is started will be available as a make variable inside the makefile

you can discover where the value came by using make's `$(origin)` function:
```
$(info $(FOO) $(origin FOO))
```

a variable imported from the environment can be overridden inside the makefile. simply set it's value
```
FOO=bar
$(info $(FOO) $(origin FOO))
```

it's possible to prevent a definition in a makefile from overriding the environment by specifying the `-e` (or `--environment-overrides`) option on the command line.

if you want to guarantee that the variable gets it value inside the makefile and not the environment, specify `override`:
```
override FOO=bar
$(info $(FOO) $(origin FOO))
```

another way of getting around -e is by setting the variable when you run the make command. "Running FOO=foo make -e FOO=fooey on the command line will output fooey command line. Here $(origin FOO) returned command line."

confusing... simple rule: the override directive beats the command line, which beats environment overrides (the -e option), which beats variables defined in a makefile, which beats the original environment.

you can always use `$(origin)` to find out what's going on.

command line beats makefile beats environment.

set a variable if it doesn't exist:
```
ifndef BUILD_DEBUG
BUILD_DEBUG := yes
endif
```

shorthand for that with the `?=` operator:
```
BUILD_DEBUG ?= yes
.PHONY: all
all: ; @echo BUILD_DEBUG is $(BUILD_DEBUG
```


### environment used by commands
the environment used when make runs a command is the environment make started with, plus any variables *exported* in the makefile, as well as a few variables make adds itself.

```
FOO=bar

all: ; @echo FOO is $$FOO
```

double `$$` is an escaped `$` and means that the command passed to the shell by make is `echo FOO is $FOO`. you can use a double $ to get a single $ into the shell.

you can use the export directive to be sure the variable is set in the environment:
```
export FOO=bar
```

similarly you can `unexport FOO`.

"You might be wondering what happens if you export and unexport a vari­able. The answer is that the last directive wins"

the export directive can also be used with target-specific variables to modify the environment for a particular rule:
```
export FOO=bar
all: export FOO=just for all
all: ; @echo FOO is $$FOO
```
